Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich Radiolab.
Today we are continuing our search for ways to outside oneself,
solve the problems going on inside oneself. Ooh, that's nicely done.
Now thinking back to Oliver's sexist story that we heard at the top of the last
segment, this notion that you,
one might use terror to, uh,
to broker a relationship with one's creative self or one's perhaps addicted
self. Let's take that idea and kick it up a notch. Maybe two notches.
I mean for that we go to report or Gregory Warner.
Reporter with marketplace though marketplace was nice enough to let us borrow
him for this story. He's a budget. Tell right now. You understand that?
I have no idea. Gregory. None. Whatever what it is you're about to tell me. I,
I have been purposely kept in the dark. Yes.
Unless of course you have already told me somewhere. No,
I'm sure you've forgotten to Greg. Just set it up.
How did you find out about this? I heard about it, um, while washing dishes.
Actually my wife was telling me about a friend's ex boyfriend who was an
alcoholic. Friends, ex boyfriend friends,
ex boyfriend is an alcoholic in Russia. He's, he's, he's Russian. And um,
this man didn't want to drink anymore and so the treatment that he got was to
have a capsule surgically inserted under the skin,
some kind of chemical compound that if he drank again,
this capsule would explode into his bloodstream and kill it.
What? Which he was given the bomb. Yeah,
but that would be triggered by his bed behave. Exactly. And that's all you knew.
That's all I knew. Well, but wait a second. Who would, who would do this? Who,
who did he go to? Well, that's, that's what I did.
Fortunately I was on my way to Russia.
And what was the question in your mind was what's this real check check?
So I get to Moscow and I hired a fixer interpreter.
Her name is Ana Musta Nova. It's hard to tell what street I'm on right now.
She had found this clinic that does this treatment.
We go in through the gate, call this area, lungs of Moscow, lungs of Moscow,
because the wind is coming through this area and we arrive at this sort of large
house, kind of a drab exterior.
They assured us immediately into a waiting room.
[inaudible] there's a fish tank. Is there plants? The House pretty lush,
so it wasn't very hospitaly. No, not very hospitaly very,
very comfortable guys around lazy fish and then [inaudible]
for summit. Hi, my name is head doctor.
His name is just slow or slow yet just slow Davita. He greets us.
We become into his pretty spare office. Going to describe the vouchers live.
That'd be enough. He looks actually exactly as you'd, yes.
A a a Russian psychotherapist and our cologists with luck of no guessing for
that. Maybe. Maybe I'd take that back.
He's got a beard and he's got a bulbous head.
He musically bright, bright green eyes.
[inaudible] this man is a doctor and this man is absolutely a doctor. No,
I wish. No, there are degrees on the wall. [inaudible]
yeah, so usually this capsule is inserted into the buttocks,
right? The wind as well as therapy.
That actually if that's why it was cold at torpedo
[inaudible]
because it is placed in a person's body and kept the way at RPD and Assembler
ring is kept
your butt well under the skin. And how does, if the person drinks,
does it make them sick or does it make them die?
Basically she smeared Newseum. He said, you know, it doesn't,
shouldn't kill you.
One can never exclude death,
but of course the doctor is not going to kill his patient,
which in block loop but personal with you,
it's very bad, extremely bad. [inaudible]
you will have uh,
pains almost in thereabout palate.
GALOP accelerated heart rate than that with shortness of breath, everything,
nausea, vomiting, throbbing headache date, visual disturbance,
mental confusion and circulatory collapse.
And these medicine can remain in the body from a short period of time, two,
three years for instance.
But the pill is real well,
so that's exactly what I asked them next is the capsule in some way a placebo
[inaudible] yeah, that's the new possible yet. It's not a policy.
It's not a placebo.
[inaudible] if you don't believe I can give you a pill and that will be like
coding for one day.
Okay. Hello. Wait, and you agreed.
Freaking pal said I would and um, can you give me a pill that would last, um,
three years, uh, but tell him yet the political
[inaudible] [inaudible] if you agree, Greg Gray. What the phrase? No,
I'll tell you what I was thinking because at this point,
IVF and I had been talking for like two hours and he hadn't let me out of the
office. I had asked to see the procedure room. I'd asked to see the torpedo.
And so I realized the only way to actually see it was to agree to have it done.
[inaudible] patient. Yeah. Ready? Yeah.
That's cool. We leave the office, we go down a hallway and up some stairs.
There's no lush carpet, no fish tanks, no plants.
Is that someone's screaming? Yeah. Yeah.
[inaudible] good buddies. It's a psychiatric clinic.
You don't want my translators getting worried. She's like a friend. You know,
if you meet a friend in Russia, you have to go drinking with them. I said,
I'll die in his arm.
So he leads me into this room. It looks, I mean,
just like an exam room in a doctor's clinic.
There's this sink in the nurse part. Defibrillator machine. No. Yeah.
Can I see the, uh, [inaudible] and he just immediately ignores me.
Go ahead and get it. Picks up some instruments,
washes his hands and I see the torpedo. Oh, I'm good. I guess it was.
He then turns and he says, yes, there is a [inaudible].
He does a stabbing motion with his foot. His hand make a small cut.
This is how deep it is.
[inaudible] so he's going in, well,
just before he's going to actually cut open my butt.
And he does this with everybody. He gives you a pill, which is the same drug,
but it only lasts for one day. And then he tests it. He tests it.
How does that work? Can you take a pill and it'll give you a [inaudible]?
He puts just a drop of vodka, a small job of on your towel drop.
Once that drop of vodka hits my tongue, I will feel all those symptoms.
You had sinks. You can't breathe in January. A personal pills. He's dying.
What bullet?
[inaudible] sometimes people are so scared that urinate right here.
Maybe a, uh, can I take it at home?
So I, uh, actually no, I don't want to take chicken out. Can't do it.
I'm not, I'm not strong enough.
He at that point realized he'd won w and he shows me the pillows.
This is what is inserted in the body. Really. This is it.
It's so little little mmm.
About the size of a, uh, protect tech. Ticktack okay.
The Ticketek torpedo hits comes right off the lips.
It turns out that inside that little pill is a very real truck.
It's called [inaudible] and it was out.
It was actually a substance that was used in the rubber industry.
This Eugene did Eugene Reichel,
I'm an assistant professor at the University of Chicago.
He's writing a whole book about these treatment programs in Russia.
He says this drug was discovered back in the early 19 hundreds and they found
that the a workers in the rubber industry where unable to tolerate alcohol,
this is kind of folk knowledge in that, in that industry for awhile.
So it wasn't like don't give that guy a beer. He works in rubber. I know.
Basically what they sell fram does is it creates a kind of toxic byproduct.
They still for in blocks a certain enzyme from being absorbed and it causes all
these very real symptoms. So you'd get a little bit poisoned. Yeah.
And is this used outside of these Russian clinics? It is, but,
but there is a big difference only in, in Russian clinics they have these
long acting captain,
the long acting form of Basal Harambe,
which is not something that exists.
The subdermal implants basically,
they don't actually release any deisel for em after, you know,
the first week or something like that.
So, so if I had taken that drop of alcohol,
then I would have felt all those symptoms.
But it doesn't last for longer than a week.
Yeah. So effectively. That's basically a scam.
I believe scam is the word you're looking for. Um, how mainstream is this?
I mean,
is this the equivalent of like guava pills or whatever they are where you,
you can find them in like vitamin shops, but they're kind of fringy.
That's the thing is that this is not fringy at all. You know,
over 60% of the treatment methods offered by Russian Nikon narcotics.
Zero 60 more than half. Yes. Yes.
And Eugene emailed later to say he was just being conservative.
The real number is closer to 80%
mm. Wow. Coded,
which happened 15 years before he died. My, my own translator,
honor her uncle went through this procedure when he, when he was drunk,
he didn't care before.
I remember my grandmother crying all the time because you could go fishing and
then disappear for a night and this guy, textbook alcoholic,
everybody knew that he was drunk, went through this coding procedure.
It's called coding because it wasn't the drug form that goes in your bud.
It was actually a, it's a kind of hypnotic suggestion that goes in your brain,
but, but same general procedure doctrine, the light go,
he was doing something with his hands, some,
some gestures in front of Sergei's face and then he Sergei closed his eyes and
he had a feeling that, uh,
some we could force was pulled out of his body
and this guy finished high school. This guy was an aeronautical engineer.
Oh. My sense is that,
that there's some people who suspend their disbelief because at some level they
have the motivation to do that. But if it only lasts a week,
why wouldn't people like after two weeks or a month or six months, just start,
just take it to sip and realize, oh, nothing happened.
And they just start drinking again. But some people do. Some people do.
First of all,
there are lots of people who do go to 12 step therapy and who guru could do go
2% 60% you said that 80% no, no, no, no. I know, I know. It's,
it is very prevalent and very popular. So No, the story,
we thought there's something Russian about this. Yeah.
That it's got a sense of submission and belief,
all sort of asserted by a higher authority with no way to check or to second
guess ev even the way in which repression is used instead of acceptance.
It just feels very rushed and wouldn't work in Manhattan. Work in Los Angeles
wouldn't work in Chicago. I think that here's the distinction in North America,
the prevailing understanding of addiction is that it's a disease of denial.
It's not about the substance as much as it is about the fact that you're kind of
out of touch with some kind of truths about your self and your condition.
That's a radically different understanding of what the problem is, um,
than the one that underlies the Saturday interrupt.
As a skeptical American, I got to say there is something about this treatment,
this Russian treatment that makes sense to me.
Seems to me when you're in the grips of an addiction,
you've already lost control of a certain part of yourself or a part of yourself
is already in control. That shouldn't be,
and you can try and kind of love that part and make peace with it and hug it and
do the 12 step thing or you could destroy it, you know,
build a wall around it so that you don't have to deal with it. That's
David [inaudible] is so good at imprisoning that part of you.
[inaudible] punish skeptic. Do you know what a panic attacks of panic are?
Stuff like [inaudible] struck. Struck is fear. Fear.
There is strong fear. Do you understand what it is? Strong, very strong fear.
This is when somebody, Dr. David,
I've told me that he had trained as a psychotherapist during the Soviet war in
Afghanistan in the 80s he says to me it to where we just imagine a situation
where a soldier sees his friend on the road.
He has mines tied to his body. He has no ears, no eyes.
His legs are compatible with these look normal, but he's still alive.
[inaudible] private. According to all rules.
This kind of person should be taken to the hospital. Wait, so,
but after seeing this, every soldier says to his friend,
if you find me in this kind of condition, tortured by the Mujahideen,
godly kill me, just bloating, watching, go to these tortures,
slammed Rizzio yesterday. Women can drive a person crazy beat.
Is that just something he was having you imagine?
Or are you saying that something he saw, that's something he saw?
Would he learn from the way in which these mujahideen were fighting?
This war is that you can,
you can kill your enemy. That's one method of warfare.
Or you can strike fear
into the heart of your enemy and kill not only that soldier,
but terrorize his whole Putin, uh,
[inaudible] and what rules this world's throw
[inaudible] if he could make you afraid he could change your,
this coding, it's completely changed his life.
This is your uncle? Yeah. He became very, uh,
I had a feeling that he sort of discovered the life for himself.
Once again, he started gardening.
He picking mushrooms.
Do you think coding worked?
I guess? Yeah. I don't know how it worked,
but it did work for him because he hadn't drank to the rest of his life.
[inaudible]
thanks Greg. All right, thanks. Okay. I got to say that,
that right there, that's Ulysses contract, except for instead of the rope,
you got fear,
right? As opposed to say if a Ulysses went through, um,
went through, you know,
counseling about the sirens and it's not necessarily, you know, in fact,
the sirens aren't that hot. In fact, you'll die. Uh, yeah. And they, you know,
you really have a wife and she's nice too. Anyhow,
thanks to marketplace for letting US borrow. Greg.
Greg has a great series he's putting together on, uh, what does it, yeah.
A series of stories on marketplace about the economics of healthcare and in
Russia, which you can get to from marketplace.org or also radiolab.org.
And if you go there, you can subscribe to our podcast even while you listen.
This is life. Penelope just signed up the other week.